Add pathway analysis intro paragraph to microarray ORA (#356)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_01_ora.Rmd

# Purpose of this analysis

This example is one of pathway analysis module set, we recommend looking at the [pathway analysis table below](#how-to-choose-a-pathway-analysis) to help you determine which pathway analysis method is best suited for your purposes.

This particular example analysis shows how you can use over-representation analysis (ORA) to determine if a set of genes (e.g., those differentially expressed using some cutoff) shares more or fewer genes with gene sets/pathways than we would expect at random.
This pathway analysis method does not require any particular sample size, since the only input from your dataset is a set of genes of interest [@Yaari2013].

⬇️ [**Jump to the analysis code**](#analysis) ⬇️

### What is pathway analysis?

We refer to any technique that uses predetermined sets of genes that are related or coordinated in their expression in some way (e.g., participate in the same molecular process, are regulated by the same transcription factor) to interpret a high-throughput experiment as pathway analysis.

> In the context of refine.bio, we use these techniques to analyze and interpret genome-wide gene expression experiments.

Reviewer: We link to refine.bio further down in the notebook at line 114 (probably because its relevance to that section but also perhaps because it was the first instance of refine.bio being mentioned in the context of the notebook).

Now that this is the first time mentioning refine.bio I think that we should link to the webpage here, what do you think?

The rationale for performing pathway analysis is that looking at the pathway-level may be more biologically meaningful than considering individual genes, especially if a large number of genes are differentially expressed between conditions of interest.
In addition, many relatively small changes in the expression values of genes in the same pathway could lead to a phenotypic outcome and these small changes may go undetected in differential gene expression analysis.

> We highly recommend taking a look at [Ten Years of Pathway Analysis: Current Approaches and Outstanding Challenges](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002375) from @Khatri2012 for a more comprehensive overview and reading the primary publications and documentation of the methods and sources we will introduce below.

Reviewer: This sentence seems a little long.

```suggestion
We highly recommend taking a look at [Ten Years of Pathway Analysis: Current Approaches and Outstanding Challenges](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002375) from @Khatri2012 for a more comprehensive overview. We have provided primary publications and documentation of the methods and sources we will introduce below.
```

Perhaps something like this?

Also, what do you mean by "sources" in this context?

Author: > Also, what do you mean by "sources" in this context?

The references we sprinkle in the paragraphs (as well as the 'Resources for further learning` section). Will mention this more specifically.

### How to choose a pathway analysis?

> 

Reviewer: The spacing and the format of the below table makes it a bit difficult to read in the rendered html file i.e:
<img width="852" alt="Screen Shot 2020-11-16 at 4 46 12 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/43576623/99311912-4b7b2b00-282b-11eb-98ed-0302b03f99a3.png">

Is there a way that we can have the text aligned under the appropriate column headers? It may have to do with the spacing between each section of text?

Author: I was editing this in a markdown file and silly me, I assumed it should also be fine in Rmd. Not so. Good catch.

Author: Rmd doesn't like me having bulleted lists inside my table, while markdown is fine with it. Hmm....

Author: So apparently Rmarkdown has problem with making a list in a markdown table with `<ul><li>` (regular markdown is fine with this) but Rmarkdown is okay with `<br>` in a table so that's what I switched to here.

This table summarizes the pathway analyses examples in this module.

|Analysis|What is required for input|What output looks like |✅ Pros| ⚠️ Cons|
|--------|--------------------------|-----------------------|-------|-------|

> |[**ORA (Over-representation Analysis)**](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_01_ora.html)|A list of gene IDs (no stats needed)|A per-pathway hypergeometric test result|- Simple<br><br> - Inexpensive computationally to calculate p-values| - Requires arbitrary thresholds and ignores any statistics associated with a gene<br><br> - Assumes independence of genes and pathways|

Author: It's your typical p value, it just comes from a hypergeometric test. I will drop the hypergeometric note if we find that distracting.

> |[**ORA (Over-representation Analysis)**](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_01_ora.html)|A list of gene IDs (no stats needed)|A per-pathway hypergeometric test result|- Simple<br><br> - Inexpensive computationally to calculate p-values| - Requires arbitrary thresholds and ignores any statistics associated with a gene<br><br> - Assumes independence of genes and pathways|

Author: Hmm... I feel like if I drop the "hypergeometric" part this sentence doesn't say much.

> |[**ORA (Over-representation Analysis)**](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/pathway-analysis_microarray_01_ora.html)|A list of gene IDs (no stats needed)|A per-pathway hypergeometric test result|- Simple<br><br> - Inexpensive computationally to calculate p-values| - Requires arbitrary thresholds and ignores any statistics associated with a gene<br><br> - Assumes independence of genes and pathways|

Author: I'm gonna keep it and assume if people want to know more they will go to the analysis itself.

## Check out our file structure!

Your new analysis folder should contain:

- The example analysis `.Rmd` you downloaded  
- A folder called `data` (currently empty)
- A folder for `plots` (currently empty)  
- A folder for `results` (currently empty)  

Your example analysis folder should contain your `.Rmd` and three empty folders (which won't be empty for long!).

> If the concept of a "file path" is unfamiliar to you; we recommend taking a look at our [section about file paths](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#an-important-note-about-file-paths-and-Rmds).

Author: Oh, I should have made it clear, no actual changes have been made here. Github just put it because of a weird spacing thing. 

This same sentence is in the template so is in many other places. I'm going to temporarily ignore this punctuation change since I'm not sure its worth the effort (for now) until we find more things we want changed in the template. But I'll keep in mind.

> If the concept of a "file path" is unfamiliar to you; we recommend taking a look at our [section about file paths](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#an-important-note-about-file-paths-and-Rmds).

Author: Oh, I put a warning in my PR description, but it could be easily missed: 

> Note The Files Changed is showing weird spacing things, but there are no actual changes after line 47 so you don't need to review beyond that point.

> Where `N` is the number of genes in the background distribution, `M` is the number of genes in a pathway, `n` is the number of genes we are interested in (our differentially expressed genes), and `k` is the number of genes that overlap between the pathway and our genes of interest.

Reviewer 2: Readers may be familiar with a 2x2 contingency table, which could work as a complementary way to describe the data and may pair well with showing the formula (which may be a roadblock for some readers).

| | Genes of interest: | Yes | No | Total |
|-|-|-|-|-|
|Gene in pathway: | Yes | k | M - k | M |
| |No | n - k | N - M + n + k | N - M |
| | Total | n | N - n | N |

Author: I like this idea but its a bit outside the scope of this PR. But, I think this change should happen when we address the other ORA items with #306 So I will track this idea there for when I get to that.

So, we will need to provide to `clusterProfiler` two genes lists:

1) Our genes of interest (`n`)
2) What genes were in our total background set (`N`). (All genes that originally had an opportunity to be measured).

## Determine our genes of interest list

We will use our differential expression results to get a genes of interest list.

> Let's use our adjusted p values as a cutoff.

Reviewer 2: May be good to mention in the paragraph here that the code also filters out down regulated genes in case the reader just skims over the code and misses that detail

Author: Gonna also put this on the docket for a PR with ORA specific changes along with #306
